--- PAGE 1 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Preface
It is matter of great pride and privilege to introduce our Institute. Shri. Shamrao Patil (Yadravkar) Educational & Charitable Trust’s, Sharad Institute of Technology, College of Engineering, Yadrav (Ichalkaranji). SITCOE is Autonomous Institute, NBA accredited programs and NAAC ‘A’ grade Technical institution in the State of Maharashtra. SITCOE has been established in the year 2009 with a view to “Build a Bright Future” for the young people of the Rural part of our Country. The College is approved by AICTE, New Delhi, recognized by Govt. of Maharashtra i.e. DTE, Mumbai and affiliated to DBATU Lonere. Sharad Institute of Technology, College of Engineering, Yadrav is one of the youngest institutes in India to become Autonomous Institute merely in the journey of Eleventh year only.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Definitions
1. “UGC” means University Grant Commission
2. “AICTE” means All India Council for Technical Educations
3. “University” means Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Technological University, Lonere.
4. “College” means Sharad Institute of Technology, College of Engineering, Yadrav.
5. “SITCOE” means Sharad Institute of Technology, College of Engineering
6. “Academic Council” means apex academic body governing the academic programmes and policies in Sharad Institute of Technology, College of Engineering, Yadrav.
7. “BoG” means Board of Governors (Administrative Council) in Sharad Institute of Technology, College of Engineering, Yadrav.
8. “BoS” means Board of Studies-departmental academic body common for UG and PG programmes.
9. “BoE” means Board of Examinations
10. “DAAB” means Departmental Academic and Advisory Board
11. “PAQIC” means Program Assessment and Quality Improvement Committee
12. “Program” means a specific branch of engineering such as Mechanical Engineering, Civil Engineering etc.
13. “NEP” means National Education Policy
14. “Semester” means period in which academic activities are carried out in SITCOE.
15. “Course” means subject containing theory/laboratory/seminar/project/mini project.
16. “Course credit” means weightage assigned to a course.
17. “Grade” means double letter assigned to indicate the performance of student in a course.
18. “SGPA” means Semester Grade Point Average, related to particular semester
19. “CGPA” means Cumulative Grade Point Average
20. “ATKT” means Allowed To Keep Term
21. “Academic R&R” means Academic rules and regulations to be followed by students

--- PAGE 3 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Vision of the Institute
To be a centre of excellence in technical education by using cutting edge technology that produces competent engineers of today and tomorrow to serve the society.

Mission of the Institute
- To impart quality education by implementing state-of-the-art teaching-learning methods to enrich the academic competency, credibility and integrity of the students.
- To facilitate a conducive ambience and infrastructure to develop professional skills and nurture innovation in students.
- To inculcate sensitivity towards society, respect for environment and promote high standards of ethics.

Quality Policy
We at Sharad Institute of Technology College of Engineering are committed to provide best quality in planning, design and effective implementation of technical education by involving all stakeholders, upgrading facilities and faculty through continuous improvement.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
1. INTRODUCTION
1. All Eight Under-Graduate (UG) Engineering programmes viz. Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics & Computer Engineering, Computer science and Engineering, Mechatronics Engineering, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Automation and Robotics shall be governed by the rules and regulations provided in this version of academic R&R.
2. The curriculum of each programme provides: broad based knowledge, quality content of courses, academic flexibility, scope for multi-disciplinary learning activities, opportunity for industry oriented projects, multidisciplinary minor approach.
3. The curriculum structure & Teaching and Evaluation Scheme is designed in line with the outcome based education (OBE) system.
4. The medium of instruction throughout the programme shall be in English.
5. The semester system is adopted for academic activities in the college. Normally, all odd semesters start in the First Week of July except for First semester and end in last week of October. All even semesters start in the First Week of December and end in first week of April. Academic session in each semester shall provide at least 75 teaching days, with 40 hours of teaching per week.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
2. ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE AND ACADEMIC BODIES
1. The academic administration of the college consists of committees and functionaries: Program Assessment and Quality Improvement Committee (PAQIC), Department Academic and Advisory Board (DAAB), Academic Council, Board of Governance (BoG) and functionaries are Executive Director, Principal, Dean Academics, Controller of examinations, Registrar, all Heads of Department, and autonomous coordinators of all programs.
2. The Academic Council (AC) is a statutory and supreme body that governs all academic matters of the college, and the decisions of Chairman (AC) (Principal of the college) shall be final.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Programs Offered in SITCOE
1. Civil Engineering (CE) - B.Tech
2. Mechanical Engineering (ME) - B.Tech
3. Electrical Engineering (EE) - B.Tech
4. Computer Science and Engineering (CS) - B.Tech
5. Electronics and Computer Engineering (EC) - B.Tech
6. Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AD) - B.Tech
7. Mechatronics Engineering (MT) - B.Tech
8. Automation and Robotics (AR) - B.Tech
Normal duration of these academic programmes is eight semesters. Extension requires Academic Council approval.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
3. ADMISSION
1. Admission process and eligibility for regular entry (first year) and lateral entry (second year) governed by Government of Maharashtra norms.
2. Permanent Registration Number (PRN): 10 digits coding. Column 1 & 2: Year of Admission. Column 3: Admission type (CAP, Non-CAP, EWS, TFWS, PMSSS). Column 4 & 5: FY (01), DSY (02). Column 6 & 7: Branch code. Column 8, 9 & 10: Student Number (001 to 999).

--- PAGE 8 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Change of Programme/Branch and Termination
5. Change of Programme/Branch: Eligible after completing first two semesters. Carried out purely on merit basis at beginning of third semester only. Students with fail grade (FF) or backlogs shall NOT be eligible to apply. Cannot exceed sanctioned capacity.
6. Termination of student from program:
i. Students involved in Ragging and not obeying discipline.
ii. Not completing programme in prescribed period: Maximum period of 6 years (12 semesters) for Regular entry (FY) and 5 years (10 semesters) for lateral entry (direct second year students) from date of first admission.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
4. ACADEMIC CALENDAR
1. Prepared by Dean Academics and approved by academic council.
2. Two semesters: Odd and Even. Each semester 20-22 weeks (120 days), at least 75 teaching days, with 40 hours of teaching per week.
3. Lost teaching days made up on suitable Saturdays.
5. One Page Academic Calendar provided to each student at beginning of academic year.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
5. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS AND DEFAULTER POLICY
1. All students should attend classes and expected to be regular (100% attendance) for all courses. Attendance maintained by course teacher and defaulter list prepared every 15 days.
2. Maximum 25% exemption in attendance permitted for approved leave (co-curricular, medical emergencies). Students with more than 75% attendance shall not be imposed with any penalty.
3. Defaulter / Detain / Not Eligible Students:
i. Student failing to secure 75% attendance in odd/even semester will be considered as Defaulter/Detain/Not eligible for the same semester.
ii. Detained student will NOT be allowed to appear for examination of the semester in which attendance is less than 75%.
iii. Detained student will have to re-register for the semester in the next academic year.
iv. Defaulter for odd semester is NOT eligible to appear for odd and even end semester examination, re-examination, and remedial examination in the same academic year.
v. Defaulter for even semester is not eligible to appear for end semester examination, re-examination & remedial examination for even semester.
ix. Exceptions may be considered at the discretion of Academic Council.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
6. CURRICULUM AND CREDITS
Total credits for 4-year B.Tech is 160-176 credits (typically 168-172 credits).
Course categories: Basic Science Course (BSC: 14-18 credits), Engineering Science Course (ESC: 12-16 credits), Programme Core Course (PCC), Programme Elective Course (PEC: 20 credits), Multidisciplinary Minor (MDM: 14 credits), Open Elective (OE: 08 credits), Vocational & Skill (VSEC: 08 credits), Ability Enhancement (AEC: 04 credits), Internship/On Job Training (IFT: 12 credits).
Normally courses in a semester shall not be more than six for theory and four for laboratory.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Electives and Projects
5. Open Electives: Offered to students of other departments in 5th, 6th, and 7th semester (from 3rd, 4th, 5th under NEP). Allocated on basis of CGPA/SGPA. Cannot be chosen from parent department. Minimum 15 students required to conduct elective.
7. Mini Project: Starts from 1st year 2nd semester. Project groups formed in 1st semester.
8. Major Project / Capstone Project: Starts in 6th semester, final work in 7th semester. Not more than four students in a group. Formed at end of 5th semester.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Multidisciplinary Minor (MDM) & Language Courses
11. Multidisciplinary Minor: 14 Credits. Completed from second year to final year. Laboratory course should NOT be allocated to MDM.
12. Aptitude & Language Skills: 23HSSM01, 23HSSM02, 23HSSM03, 23HSSM04.
13. Modern Indian Languages: Marathi (23MILE01), Hindi (23MILE02).

--- PAGE 15 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Multiple Entry and Exit Credit Levels
Level 4.5: One Year UG Certificate in Engg./Tech: 40-44 credits (2 semesters / 1 year).
Level 5.0: Two Years UG Diploma in Engg./Tech: 80-88 credits (4 semesters / 2 years).

--- PAGE 16 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Degree Qualifications
Level 5.0: 3 Years Bachelor’s Degree in Vocation (B.Voc) or B.Sc: 120-132 credits.
Level 6.0: 4 Years B.Tech with Multidisciplinary Minor: 160-176 credits (8 semesters).
Level 6.0: 4 Years B.Tech Honors or Double Minors or Honors with Research: 180-194 credits.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
7. EVALUATION GUIDELINES OF THEORY AND LABORATORY COURSES
Credit Definition:
1 Hr Lecture (L) per week = 1 Credit
1 Hr Tutorial (T) per week = 1 Credit
2 Hours Practical (P) per week = 1 Credit
1 Hr Practical (P) per week = 0.5 Credit
Evaluation Scheme for 3 Credit Theory Course:
Continuous Assessment 1 (CA1): 10 Marks
Continuous Assessment 2 (CA2): 10 Marks
Mid Semester Examination (MSE): 30 Marks
End Semester Examination (ESE): 50 Marks
Total Marks: 100

--- PAGE 20 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Self Learning Courses (SWAYAM / NPTEL)
1. Credit distribution: 4 week = 1 credit, 8 week = 2 credits, 12 week = 3 credits.
2. B.Tech Self-Learning course must be of 12 Weeks only.
3. CA1 marks evaluated from Best of Two of First 6 Weeks assignments on SWAYAM-NPTEL. CA2 from Best of Two of Last 6 Weeks.
4. Mid Semester Examination (MSE): Average of Online Assignments (Week 4 to Week 9) = 30 Marks.
5. End Semester Examination (ESE): Proctored Exam Score * 50 / 75 = 50 Marks.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Internship and On-Job Training Guidelines
Procedure for internship:
- Step 1: Collect Request Letter from department IIC member.
- Step 2: Industry confirmation letter.
- Step 3: Collect formats (attendance sheet, progress report).
- Step 4: Undergo internship. Faculty verifies once/twice by visiting industry.
- Step 5: Submit problem statement on or before first progress presentation.
- Step 7: Internship Certificate from industry (Minimum 18-20 Weeks).

--- PAGE 22 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Internship Evaluation Process and Schedule
- Start of internship: 1st or 2nd week of December.
- Last date to join: 3rd week of December.
- CA I presentation: After 8 weeks of internship.
- CA II presentation: After 16 weeks of internship.
- Final presentation: After minimum 18 weeks of internship.
Important Note: If student fails to complete internship as per AICTE guidelines, extension of six months and internship restarts from 1st July.
Marks distribution: CA I and CA II = 50 Marks (Internship Coordinator 20, Project Guide 15, Committee 15). ESE = 100 Marks based on final presentation to External Examiner.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Late Joining Penalty for Internship
If student joins internship after designated institute deadline, CA I, CA II, and ESE marks will be curtailed by 10 percent.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
8. GUIDELINES FOR EXIT POLICY (NEP 2020)
1. Apply for Exit / UG Certificate within One Week after declaration of End Semester result.
2. Must PASS all courses till Summer End Semester Examination.
4. Complete required Exit Courses within 45 calendar days after approval from institute.
5. Maximum duration for completion of program is Six Years. Failure to earn credits within 6 years requires readmission to First Year.
6. Credits added to Academic Bank of Credits (ABC).
7. Student has to pay Program Exit Fees / Summer Term Fees before applying.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
9. COMMITTEES AND FUNCTIONARIES
Academic Council (AC): Solely responsible for all academic matters, framing policy, approval of courses and syllabi.
Composition: Principal (Chairman), All HoDs, Four seniority teachers, at least four outside experts from industry/education, three university nominees, Dean Academics (Member Secretary).

--- PAGE 26 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Board of Studies (BoS) and DAAB
Board of Studies (BoS): Basic constituent. Frames syllabi, reviews courses, continuous assessment details. Chaired by HoD of concerned department.
Departmental Academic and Advisory Board (DAAB): Chaired by HoD, two senior faculty members, industry representative, outside academician, meritorious alumnus, parent, student.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Board of Examinations (BoE)
Composition: Director (Chairman), Controller of Examinations (COE: Member Secretary), Dean Academics, University Nominee (COE of Shivaji University), Industry Expert, Coordinators.
Functions: Conduct examinations, timetable, paper setting, Complaint Redressal Committee (CRC) of three members for exam complaints.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
PAQIC and Faculty Mentors
PAQIC (Programme Assessment and Quality Improvement Committee): HoD (Chairman), five faculty members. Monitors curriculum delivery, CO-PO attainment, student feedback.
Faculty Advisor / Mentor / Proctor: Appointed by HoD, assigned a group of 20-25 students of parent department, guides on academic matters throughout their study. Interacts at least twice per semester.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Course Teacher Duties
Maintains attendance records on Moodle, displays attendance and evaluation, reports poor performance and low attendance to HoD monthly, submits continuous assessment marks.

--- PAGE 30 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
10. DISCIPLINE AND CONDUCT
Misconduct includes:
- Disruption of teaching, examination, or campus activities.
- Ragging in any form (criminal offence defined by Supreme Court of India).
- Eve teasing or disrespectful behaviour to women.
- Forgery, tampering with documents or identity cards.
- Consuming alcohol, dangerous drugs, or intoxicants on campus.
- Carrying weapons or firearms.
- Malpractice in examination.
- Refusing to provide identity card when demanded.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Disciplinary Penalties and Examination Malpractice
Penalties by Grievance Redressal and Disciplinary Committee:
a) Written warning to parents/guardian.
b) Imposition of fine ranging from Rs. 500/- up to Rs. 5000/-.
c) Suspension from College/Hostel/Mess/Library.
d) Cancellation of scholarship or financial assistance.
e) Recovery of loss caused to college property.
f) Debarring from sports/NSS/student club/placement.
k) Action as per Maharashtra Anti-Ragging Act 1999.
Malpractice in exams: Investigated by Complaint Redressal Committee (CRC) under BoE. Penalties include cancellation of performance in that course or all courses, debarring from exams, expulsion.

--- PAGE 32 ---
Academic Rules and Regulations
Identity Card and Mobile Phone Policy
- Every admitted student shall be issued photo identification (ID) card which must be retained by student while registered at SITCOE. Must have valid ID card with him/her while in the institute.
- The MOBILE Phone is NOT allowed to use in college campus in any case.
